

CORAL
Full Implementation Plan
AI-Powered Desktop Snipping Assistant
Windows — Python + PyQt5 — Groq API



1. Project Overview
Coral is a global screen-snipping tool that understands context. When you snip any region of your screen, a floating AI chat popup appears. You type what you want done in plain English, and Coral reads your OS context — folder paths, file names, desktop icons — and executes the action on the real filesystem.

Coral does not use screenshots for AI processing. Instead, it reads OS-level metadata directly, making it faster, cheaper, and more accurate than a vision-based approach.

Core Concept
Snip any region using Ctrl + Shift + S
Floating popup appears with the snipped image + a chat textbox
Type your request in plain English
Coral confirms what it will do before executing
You approve, reject, or adjust — like a conversation
Coral executes the action on your real filesystem
Say undo at any time to reverse the last action

Decisions Locked
Decision
Choice
Framework
Python + PyQt5
Operating System
Windows only
Trigger Hotkey
Ctrl + Shift + S
Popup UI
Snipped image + chat textbox
Interaction Style
Chatbot — confirm before execute
AI Model
Groq API (Llama 3.3 70B) — primary
AI Fallback
Ollama local — offline backup
Context Method
OS metadata — no image needed for known surfaces
Scope
Single window at snip time
Stale Path Fix
Snapshot frozen at snip moment
Failed Positioning
Drop anywhere on desktop as fallback


2. Architecture

Project Structure
coral/
├── main.py              — Entry point, hotkey listener, app lifecycle
├── overlay.py           — Transparent fullscreen snipping overlay
├── popup.py             — Floating chat popup UI
├── context.py           — OS context capture and classification
├── executor.py          — Action execution on the filesystem
├── undo_manager.py      — Undo history and reverse actions
├── groq_client.py       — Groq API call + system prompt
└── utils.py             — Constants, helpers, error handling

Data Flow
The complete pipeline from trigger to action execution:

Step 1 — User presses Ctrl + Shift + S
Step 2 — PyQt5 transparent overlay appears fullscreen
Step 3 — User draws a region by clicking and dragging
Step 4 — At mouse release: OS context is read AND screenshot of region is taken simultaneously
Step 5 — Context is frozen into a snapshot dict (never updated again)
Step 6 — Floating popup appears showing snipped image + empty chat
Step 7 — User types request and hits Enter
Step 8 — Request + frozen context sent to Groq API
Step 9 — Groq returns a friendly message + structured JSON action
Step 10 — Coral shows the message to the user (confirmation)
Step 11 — User says yes / no / modify
Step 12 — If yes: executor runs the action, undo manager saves the reverse
Step 13 — Coral confirms completion in the chat

Context Object Structure
This is the frozen snapshot sent to Groq with every request:

{
"captured_at": "2025-04-07T10:23:00",
"context_type": "desktop",   // desktop | file_explorer | unknown_app
"region": { "x": 120, "y": 80, "w": 600, "h": 400 },
"path": "C:/Users/User/Desktop",
"items": [
{ "name": "Resume.pdf",  "type": "file",    "position": [130, 90] },
{ "name": "Projects",   "type": "folder",  "position": [210, 90] },
{ "name": "Chrome",     "type": "shortcut","position": [290, 90] }
]
}


3. Implementation Phases

Phase 1 — Hotkey and Overlay
Goal: Ctrl + Shift + S opens a transparent overlay. User draws a region. Coordinates are saved.

Files: main.py, overlay.py

Register a global hotkey listener using pynput
On trigger, launch a PyQt5 fullscreen transparent window
User clicks and drags to define the snip region
Draw a visible selection rectangle in real time as user drags
On mouse release, save region as (x, y, w, h) and close overlay
Pass the region coordinates to the next phase

Done when: Pressing Ctrl + Shift + S, drawing a region, and printing the coordinates to console works correctly.


Phase 2 — OS Context Capture
Goal: At the exact moment of snip, read everything about the environment and freeze it.

Files: context.py

Use win32gui to detect which window class sits under the snip region
Classify the context — desktop, file explorer, or unknown app
Desktop: window class is Progman or WorkerW
File Explorer: window class is CabinetWClass
Unknown: anything else
If desktop: use win32api to read icon names and positions from the desktop
If file explorer: use pywinauto to read the address bar path and visible file list
If unknown app: flag for image fallback (not needed for hackathon scope)
Build the frozen context dict with all captured data
Also capture a PIL screenshot of the region for display in the popup

Done when: Snipping the desktop prints a list of visible icons. Snipping File Explorer prints the current folder path and visible files.


Phase 3 — Popup UI
Goal: After snipping, a floating chat window appears near the snipped region showing the snipped image and a text input.

Files: popup.py

Create a PyQt5 frameless always-on-top window
Position it near the snip region (offset slightly so it doesn't cover the snip)
Top section: display the snipped image (PIL image converted to QPixmap)
Middle section: scrollable chat history area
Bottom section: text input box + send button
On Enter or Send: emit the typed message to the chat pipeline
Show a loading indicator while waiting for Groq response
Dismiss popup on Escape key or clicking outside

Done when: Popup appears after snipping, image is shown, you can type a message and it prints to console.


Phase 4 — Groq API Integration
Goal: User message plus frozen context goes to Groq. Groq returns a human-readable confirmation message and a structured JSON action.

Files: groq_client.py

Set up Groq API client with Llama 3.3 70B model
Write a strict system prompt that forces Groq to always return two parts:
Part 1: A friendly human-readable message explaining what it will do
Part 2: A JSON action block with action type and parameters
Pass the full context object and user message in each request
Parse the response and split into message and JSON
Handle malformed responses gracefully with a retry or error message
Keep full conversation history per snip session for multi-turn chat

Groq System Prompt (Core)
You are Coral, a desktop AI assistant for Windows.
You receive context about what was snipped and the user's request.
Always reply with:
1. A friendly confirmation message (what you will do).
2. A JSON action block in this exact format:
{ "action": "...", "name": "...", "path": "..." }

Available actions:
create_folder, create_file, move_file,
rename_file, create_shortcut, arrange_by_type

Never execute anything. Only describe and return JSON.
Always respond in JSON with keys: message, action_json.

Done when: Typing create a folder called Work in Downloads returns the correct JSON action block.


Phase 5 — Action Executor
Goal: The JSON action from Groq is translated into real filesystem operations.

Files: executor.py

create_folder — os.makedirs at the given path
create_file — open and write an empty file at the given path
move_file — shutil.move from source to destination
rename_file — os.rename with old and new name
create_shortcut — use win32com.client to create a .lnk file
arrange_by_type — scan folder, categorize by extension, move into subfolders
Images: .jpg .jpeg .png .gif .bmp .webp → Images folder
Documents: .pdf .docx .xlsx .pptx .txt .csv → Documents folder
Videos: .mp4 .mov .avi .mkv .wmv → Videos folder
Audio: .mp3 .wav .flac .aac → Audio folder
Others: everything else → Others folder
Always use send2trash for any deletion — never permanently delete
Return a result dict with success status and details for the undo manager

Done when: Each of the six actions executes correctly on real files and folders.


Phase 6 — Undo Manager
Goal: Every action saves its exact reverse. Saying undo reverses the last action cleanly.

Files: undo_manager.py

Maintain an in-memory history stack of actions and their reverses
Before each action, push a reverse instruction to the stack
create_folder reverse → delete_folder
move_file reverse → move_file back to original location
rename_file reverse → rename back to original name
create_file reverse → send2trash the file
arrange_by_type reverse → move all files back to original folder
When user says undo in the chat, pop the last item and execute the reverse
Confirm the undo action in the chat before and after executing
Handle empty history gracefully — tell the user there is nothing to undo

Done when: Creating a folder and then saying undo deletes it. Moving files and saying undo moves them back.


Phase 7 — Full Chat Flow
Goal: The complete conversational flow works end to end across all scenarios.

Files: popup.py, groq_client.py

User types request → Groq returns confirmation message → shown in chat
User says yes → executor runs → undo manager saves reverse → done message shown
User says no → cancelled message shown, nothing executed
User modifies the request → Groq re-interprets with full chat history → new confirmation
User says undo → undo manager reverses last action → confirmation shown
Error during execution → friendly error message shown in chat with suggestion
Groq API failure → show error, offer to retry

Done when: A full back and forth conversation works for all actions including undo.


Phase 8 — Demo Polish
Goal: Coral looks and feels production-ready for the hackathon demo.

System tray icon using pystray — Coral runs silently in background
Tray menu: Open, Settings, Quit
Smooth overlay fade-in animation when snipping
Coral icon and branding in the popup header
Loading spinner animation while Groq processes the request
Keyboard shortcut Escape to close popup at any time
Graceful handling of permission errors with helpful messages
Test all six actions end to end on a clean demo folder
Test undo for each action type
Test multi-turn conversation: modify request mid-conversation


4. Full Tech Stack

Library
Purpose
Install
PyQt5
UI — overlay, popup, chat window
pip install PyQt5
pynput
Global hotkey listener
pip install pynput
pywin32
Windows OS API access
pip install pywin32
pywinauto
File Explorer path reading
pip install pywinauto
Pillow (PIL)
Screenshot capture and image display
pip install Pillow
groq
Groq API client
pip install groq
send2trash
Safe deletion (always recoverable)
pip install send2trash
pystray
System tray icon
pip install pystray
win32com
Shortcut (.lnk) creation
Included in pywin32
shutil
File move and copy
Built into Python
os
Folder and file creation
Built into Python

One-Line Install
pip install PyQt5 pynput pywin32 pywinauto Pillow groq send2trash pystray


5. Supported Actions

Action
What It Does
Example Request
Undo?
create_folder
Creates a new folder at the context path
Make a folder called Projects
Yes — deletes the folder
create_file
Creates an empty file with a given name
Create a file called notes.txt
Yes — sends to trash
move_file
Moves a file from one location to another
Move resume.pdf to Documents
Yes — moves it back
rename_file
Renames a file or folder
Rename this file to final_v2.pdf
Yes — renames back
create_shortcut
Creates a .lnk shortcut on desktop
Make a shortcut for Chrome here
Yes — deletes shortcut
arrange_by_type
Sorts files into Images, Docs, Videos, Audio, Others folders
Arrange all these files by type
Yes — moves all files back


6. Known Difficulties and Solutions

Difficulty
Why It's Hard
Solution
Desktop icon position writing
Windows has no simple API to place a folder at specific X,Y on desktop
Fallback: create folder anywhere on desktop if positioning fails
Groq structured output
Groq may return free text instead of clean JSON
Strict system prompt forcing JSON-only response with retry logic
Explorer path via accessibility
Accessibility tree structure can differ per Windows version
Use pywinauto address bar reading with a fallback to window title parsing
Stale window path
Explorer may navigate after snip is taken
Freeze entire context at snip moment — never re-read after
Permission errors
OneDrive, system folders, corporate machines block file actions
Wrap all OS calls in try/except and show friendly error in chat
Shortcut creation
Requires COM interface via win32com
Use win32com.client.Dispatch with Shell.Application — well documented


7. Groq System Prompt (Full)

This is the complete system prompt to be used in groq_client.py. It must be sent with every API call.

You are Coral, an AI-powered desktop assistant for Windows.

You receive two inputs:
1. A context object describing what was snipped (folder path, files, icons).
2. The user's plain English request.

You must ALWAYS reply with valid JSON in this exact format:
{
"message": "I will create a folder called Projects in your Downloads.",
"action_json": {
"action": "create_folder",
"name": "Projects",
"path": "C:/Users/User/Downloads"
}
}

Available actions and their required fields:
create_folder   → name, path
create_file     → name, path
move_file       → from, to
rename_file     → old_path, new_path
create_shortcut → target, location, shortcut_name
arrange_by_type → path

Rules:
- Always confirm before executing. Never say you have done it.
- Always use the path from the context object, never invent paths.
- If the request is unclear, ask for clarification in the message field.
- Set action_json to null if no action is needed (e.g. just a question).
- Never return anything outside the JSON structure.


8. Undo Reference

Action
Reverse Action
How
create_folder
delete_folder
send2trash the created folder path
create_file
delete_file
send2trash the created file path
move_file
move_file back
shutil.move from destination back to source
rename_file
rename_file back
os.rename new_path back to old_path
create_shortcut
delete_shortcut
send2trash the .lnk file
arrange_by_type
move all back
shutil.move each file from subfolder back to original path


9. Hackathon Demo Script

Run through this sequence to show Coral's full capability in under 5 minutes.

Demo 1 — Create a Folder on Desktop
Press Ctrl + Shift + S
Snip a region of the desktop
Type: create a folder called Coral Demo
Coral responds: I will create a folder called Coral Demo on your Desktop. Shall I go ahead?
Type: yes
Folder appears on desktop

Demo 2 — Arrange Files in Downloads
Open File Explorer at Downloads
Press Ctrl + Shift + S, snip the Explorer window
Type: arrange all these files by type
Coral lists what it will do and asks for confirmation
Type: yes
Files are sorted into Images, Documents, Videos, Others folders

Demo 3 — Undo
After Demo 2, type: undo that
Coral: I will move all files back to Downloads. Shall I?
Type: yes
All files return to original location

Demo 4 — Rename a File
Snip a region containing a file
Type: rename this to final_submission.pdf
Coral confirms and renames the file

Demo 5 — Create a Shortcut
Snip the desktop
Type: make a shortcut for Chrome on the desktop
Coral creates a Chrome.lnk shortcut


10. Future Features (Post-Hackathon)

Feature
Description
Difficulty
Snip history
See and reuse your last 5 snips from tray menu
Easy
Bulk rename
Rename all selected files with a pattern like Project_1, Project_2
Medium
Search inside snip
Find all PDFs or files matching a name in the snipped folder
Easy
Open app from snip
Snip a shortcut icon and say open this
Easy
Copy file path
Copy the full path of any visible file to clipboard
Easy
Multi-step actions
Chain actions together in one request
Medium
Mac support
Port to macOS using AppKit instead of pywin32
Hard
Unknown app vision
Fall back to Claude Vision for non-OS surfaces
Medium
Plugin system
Let others add custom actions to Coral
Hard



Coral — Built for Hackathon